In the first lesson
of this module,
we define the semantic
segmentation problem
and saw how to evaluate
the performance of
semantic segmentation algorithm
by calculating the class IOU.
In this video, we
will learn how to use
convolutional neural networks to
perform the semantic
segmentation task.
Using confidence for
semantic segmentation is
actually a little easier
than using them for
object detection.
Unlike ConvNets for
object detection,
the training and
inference stages are
practically the same for
semantic segmentation.
However, there are
some intricacies
to semantic segmentation
that we need to be aware of.
Let's begin with a quick review
of the semantic
segmentation problem.
Semantic segmentation takes
a camera images input and
provides a category
classification
for every pixel in
that image as output.
This problem can be modeled as
a function approximation problem,
and ConvNets can once again be
used to approximate
the required function.
What kind of ConvNet model can we
use to perform
this function approximation?
One idea is to use
the same ConvNet model we
used for object detection.
That is, a feature extractor
followed by an output layer.
We do not need anchors here as
we are not trying to
localize objects.
Let's see how effective
this architecture
is for performing
semantic segmentation.
You'll start by analyzing
the feature extractor.
As with the feature extractor
used for object detections,
we can use the VGG architecture.
Let's see what happens
to the size of
M by N by three input image,
as we go through
this feature extractor.
As with object detection,
our resolution will be reduced by
half after every pooling layer.
On the other hand, our depth will
increase due to
the convolutional layers.
The output feature map of
our convolutional feature
extractor will be
downsampled by 16 times.
We can add as many
convolutional pooling
blocks as needed,
but that will further
shrink our feature map.
However, we want
our output to have
a classification for
every pixel in the image.
So how can we achieve this given
a down sampled
feature map that is
16 times smaller than
our original input?
A simple solution would
be the following.
We can first compute the output
by passing the 16 times
downsampled output feature map
through a softmax layer.
We can then determine the
class of every pixel in
the subsampled output by taking
the highest class score
obtained by the softmax layer.
The final step would be
to proceed to upsample,
the downsampled output back
to the original image resolution.
How well do you think the
described approach will work?
To understand why
naive upsampling
might produce inadequate results,
let's take a look at how
upsampling increases
the image resolution.
We want to use
the nearest neighbor
upsampling on
a two-by-two image patch.
The color of the pixels
of the image patch
represent different
values of every pixel.
We want to upsample
our patch to double
its original size.
So have an upsampling
multiplier S of two.
Nearest neighbor
upsampling generates
an empty initial
upsampled grid by
multiplying Win an Hin by
the upsampling multiplier.
Each pixel in the upsampled
grid is then filled
with the value of
the nearest pixel
in the original image patch.
This process is repeated
until all the pixels in
the upsampled grid are filled
with values from the image patch.
The depth of the
output upsampled grid
remains the same as
the input image patch.
The problem induced
by upsampling is that
the upsampled output image
has very coarse boundaries.
As you can remember
from the last lesson,
one of the most
challenging problems
in semantic segmentation is
attaining smooth and
accurate boundaries
around the objects.
Smooth boundaries are
hard to attain as in
general boundaries in
the image space are ambiguous,
especially for thin objects
such as pools,
similar looking objects such
as roads and sidewalks,
and far away objects.
Naive upsampling also induces
two additional problems.
Any object less than
16 pixels in width or
height usually fully disappears
in their upsampled image.
This affects
both thin objects such
as pools and far away objects.
As they are below
the minimum dimensions
required for the pixels
to appear from
the original image.
To remedy these problems,
researchers have
formulated what is
commonly referred to
as a feature decoder.
The feature decoder
can be thought of as
a mirror image of
the feature extractor.
Instead of using
the convolution pooling paradigm
to downsample the resolution,
it uses upsampling
layers followed by
a convolutional layer to
upsample the resolution
of the feature map.
The upsampling usually using
nearest neighbor methods achieves
the opposite effect to pooling,
but results in
an inaccurate feature map.
The following
convolutional layers
are then used to correct
the features in
the upsampled feature map
with learnable filter banks.
This correction usually provides
the required smooth boundaries as
we go forward through
the feature decoder.
Let's now go through an analysis
of the dimensions of
the feature map as it travels
forward through
the feature decoder.
As a reminder, the input
feature map is downsampled
16 times with a depth of 512.
Similar to the feature extractor,
each upsampling convolution block
is referred to as
a deconvolution.
There is of course a debate among
current researchers on whether
this terminology is accurate.
But we will use it
here to refer to
the reverse of the
convolutional pooling block.
As we go through
the first deconvolution block,
our input feature map is
upsampled to twice
the input resolution.
The depth is controlled
by how many filters are
defined for each successive
convolutional layer.
As we go forward through
the rest of the decoder,
we finally arrive
at a feature map of
similar resolution
to the input image.
For reduced computational
complexity,
we usually shrink the depth
of the map as we go forward.
But this is a design choice
that depends on your application.
Note, this upsampling
mechanism is the simplest
among many of
the proposed methods
for semantic segmentation.
Please take a look at
the supplementary material
provided for more efficient,
powerful, and complex upsampling
models that have been proposed
for semantic segmentation.
Now that we have
a similar sized feature map
to our input image,
we need to generate the
semantic segmentation output.
We can perform
semantic segmentation
through a linear output layer,
followed by a softmax function.
This layer is very similar to
the classification output layer
we described in object detection.
In fact, this layer provides
a k-dimensional vector
per pixel with
the kth element being how
confident the neural network
is that the pixel belongs
to the kth class.
Let's investigate
the expected output visually.
Given an image patch and
its corresponding
ground truth label,
we can represent each pixel as
a k-dimensional one-hot vector.
A one hot vector assigns
the value of one to
the correct class and zero
to the remaining classes.
Since only that one value
is non-zero or hot.
In this case, we have two
classes and a background class,
so we are working with
a three-dimensional ground
truth vector per pixel.
The neural network drives
the output of the softmax
to be as close to one as
possible for the correct class,
and is close to zero
as possible for
the rest of the classes
for each pixel.
We then take the index of
the maximum score to recover
the required output
representation.
Note however, that we only
perform this step
during inference.
For training, we use the
softmax output score directly.
The problem of
semantic segmentation
by definition requires
the neural network to provide
a single class for
every pixel classification.
To learn how to
perform this task,
the cross entropy
classification loss
is used to train
the neural network once again.
This loss is similar
to the one we
used for the object detection
classification hit.
Cross entropy drives
the neural network
to learn a probability
distribution
per pixel that is closest to
the ground truth class
probability distribution.
Here, N total is
the total number of
classified pixels in
all the images of a mini-batch.
Usually, a mini-batch would
comprise of eight to 16 images,
and the choice of
this number depends on how
much memory your GPU has.
Finally, the cross
entropy loss compares Si,
the output of
the neural network for
every pixel with Si star,
the ground truth
classification for that pixel.
In summary, we arrived at
the following ConvNet model
for semantic segmentation.
The feature extractor
takes the image
as an input and
provides an expressive,
but low resolution
feature map as an output.
The decoder then takes
this feature map and
upsamples it to get
a final feature map of
equal resolution to
the original input image.
Finally, a linear layer
followed by a softmax function
generates the class
ConvNets vector
for each pixel in
the input image.
The architecture we described
in this lesson is one of
the simpler models that can be
used for semantic segmentation.
A lot of research on
the optimal neural network model
for semantic segmentation
has been performed.
Ideas such as
propagating the indices
from pooling layers
in the extractor to
upsampling layers in the decoder
have shown to provide a boost in
performance as well as
computational speed for
semantic segmentation models.
We've included a list of
recent manuscripts describing
architecture used for
semantic segmentation
in the supplementary material.
Congratulations, you should
now have grasp the basics
of using ConvNets to solve
the semantic
segmentation problem.
Most state of the art
segmentation networks
share the structure we
described in this video.
With a feature extractor,
a decoder and then
an output layer as
the main building blocks.
We provide some links to
recent methods as
a reference if you're
interested in diving deeper into
current top performing
algorithms.
In the next lesson, we
will describe how to use
the semantic segmentation
output to help
self-driving cars perceive a road
seen. See you next time.